# Ancestral Waves
Simulations of ancestral waves for the continuum, Wright-Fisher and Moran models.

**Note:** This is research software, written for a specific purpose. It is shared
here to allow others to reproduce the results and in the hope that it 
might provide a useful basis for others seeking to perform similar 
simulations. It is not production quality software, and probably contains
bugs. Use at your own risk!

## Quick start

First install the requirements (see below) and build the C program. 
Then, run a small number of replicates for all simulations, process the
replicate data files and generate the plots:
```sh
$ python src/simulations.py simulate all -n 10
$ python src/simulations.py process all
$ python src/simulations.py plot all
```
At the end of this process, the `figures` directory will contain postscript 
and PDF versions of all the figures. The figures will be noisy as we have 
only used 10 replicates---to improve this, run more replicates for the 
figures you are interested in, and regenerate the plots.

## Running the simulations

All of the simulations are run and analysed using the `src/simulations.py` Python
script. This script has a user interface with online help; for example,
```sh
$ python src/simulations.py -h
usage: simulations.py [-h] {simulate,process,plot,list} ...

Run simulations, process data files and generate plots.

positional arguments:
  {simulate,process,plot,list}

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
```

The script has three basic commands: `simulate`, `process` and `plot`. The fourth
command `list` just lists the available plots that we can generate:
```sh
$ python src/simulations.py list
Available plots:
         1d_pedigree_cline_shape_mean
         1d_ancestral_material_linear_genome
         1d_genetic_wave_parameters
         1d_pedigree_cline_shape_replicates
         2d_genetic_wave_parameters
         1d_pedigree_integral_equation
         1d_pedigree_wave_parameters
         1d_pedigree_numerics_comparison
         1d_pedigree_genetic_comparison
         1d_ancestral_material_free_recombination
         1d_2d_pedigree_parameters_comparison
```
A special plot ID `all` is recognised, which sequentially runs the 
command in question for all plots.

The `simulate` command takes a plot ID as a parameter, and optionally the number of 
replicates and the number of processors to use. For example,
```sh
$ python src/simulations.py simulate 1d_pedigree_wave_parameters -n 10 -p 4
```
This runs 10 replicates for the ``1d_pedigree_wave_parameters`` simulation
using 4 processes. By default a large number of replicates will be simulated
using all the available cores on the machine. Replicates are stored in the 
``data/replicates__NOBACKUP__`` directory.

The `process` command takes the raw replicate data in the ``data/replicates__NOBACKUP__``
directory, derives summaries and writes the results to files in the ``data``
directory. For example,
```sh
$ python src/simulations.py process 1d_pedigree_wave_parameters
Read 10 n replicates at g=0 for rho_e = 75.0 d = 1
Read 10 n replicates at g=5 for rho_e = 75.0 d = 1
[snip]
```

Finally, the `plot` command takes the summarised data generated by the 
`process` command and generates a plot. Plots are written in the 
`figures` directory.
```sh
$ python src/simulations.py process 1d_pedigree_wave_parameters
```

## Requirements

This software has been developed on Debian Wheezy with Python 2.7. Python 3.x is 
not supported because of upstream library problems. It _should_ work on 
any other Linux distribution without modification, once the required C libraries
have been installed. Similarly, OSX should work, but it has not been tested.

To compile the C programs, we need [libconfig](http://www.hyperrealm.com/libconfig/)
and [GSL](http://www.gnu.org/software/gsl/). Both of these are commonly available
in package managers.

On Debian/Ubuntu, for example, we can use
```sh
$ sudo apt-get install libgsl0-dev libconfig-dev
```
Once the required libaries are in place, we can compile the C program used to 
simulate the discrete models by typing `make`.

To install the required Python libraries, we can use
```sh
$ pip install -r requirements.txt
```
These can either be installed system-wide, or locally to a user using the `--user`
option. Since our requirements include `numpy`, `scipy` and `matplotlib` it may 
be more convenient to install these large packages using the local package
manager.

### Running from a new Debian Wheezy install

To run the simulations on a fresh Debian Wheezy install, do the following:
```sh
$ sudo apt-get install build-essential git libgsl0-dev libconfig-dev \
python-dev python-scipy python-pip
$ git clone https://github.com/jeromekelleher/ancestral-waves.git
$ cd ancestral-waves
$ pip install -r requirements.txt --user
$ make
```
The simulations can now be run and analysed using the commants given at
the top of the page.
